Tutorial Create Client Credentials (#115)
canonical/kafka-operator: docs/tutorial/t-create-client-credentials.md

# Create Client Credentials

> After having succesfully deployed a Kafka cluster you most probably would like to have client applications to connect to this cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After having successfully deployed a Kafka cluster you most probably would like to have your client applications be able to connect to the cluster.
```

## Install required software

### Keytool (Java)

> If your clients applications are based on Java, consider that it might need to use special Java file formats for the certificates called keystore and trustore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your client applications are based on Java, consider that it might need to use special Java file formats for the certificates called keystore and truststore.
```

> To generate these files we will need `keytool` binary. This commes preinstalled with any Java installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To generate these files we will need the `keytool` binary. This comes pre-installed with any Java installation.
```

> Make sure you have Java installed and keytool was installed with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you have Java installed and `keytool` was installed with it.
```

> 

Reviewer: **todo:** Give example of how to install Java on an ubuntu machine.

e.g `apt update && apt install openjdk-11-jre-headless`

  by default.
  * Access control management supported with user-provided ACL lists.
commands:
  - charmed-kafka.acls
  - charmed-kafka.cluster
  - charmed-kafka.configs
  - charmed-kafka.console-consumer
  - charmed-kafka.console-producer
  - charmed-kafka.consumer-groups
  - charmed-kafka.consumer-perf-test
  - charmed-kafka.dump-log
  - charmed-kafka.get-offsets
  - charmed-kafka.kafka-streams-application-reset
  - charmed-kafka.leader-election
  - charmed-kafka.log-dirs
  - charmed-kafka.producer-perf-test
  - charmed-kafka.reassign-partitions
  - charmed-kafka.replica-verification
  - charmed-kafka.run-class
  - charmed-kafka.storage
  - charmed-kafka.topics
  - charmed-kafka.transactions
  - charmed-kafka.trogdor
  - charmed-kafka.verifiable-consumer
  - charmed-kafka.verifiable-producer
  - charmed-kafka.zookeeper-shell
services:
  charmed-kafka.daemon: simple, disabled, inactive
snap-id:      PEGF4Of4BpcyjkBco8QMTwQo0kkrv8c3
tracking:     3/edge
refresh-date: 9 days ago, at 13:47 -05
channels:
  3/stable:    –
  3/candidate: –
  3/beta:      –
  3/edge:      3.3.2 2023-03-28 (16) 167MB -
installed:     3.3.2            (16) 167MB -
```

> > At the moment of writing this tutorial the charmed-kafka snap is not yet available on the stable channel. Thus, we will be using the edge channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> At the moment of writing this tutorial the `charmed-kafka` snap is not yet available on the `stable` channel. Thus, we will be using the `edge` channel.
```

> Snaps have constrained access to files as they are designed focused on security. So, once we have created a set of client credentials we will be copying those files into a folder path that the snap has access to read and write, else you might get a permission denied error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Snaps have constrained access to files as they are designed with a focus on security. Once we have created a set of client credentials, we will be copying those files into a folder path that the snap has access to read and write to avoid permission denied errors.
```

```bash
SNAP_KAFKA_PATH=/var/snap/charmed-kafka/current/etc/kafka
```

### jq

This is a utility to parse JSON objects from the CLI.

```bash
sudo snap install jq
```

> > It just makes the tutorial easier

Reviewer: **todo:** Remove this, not needed.

## Authentication

There are two protocols options for the client authentication

> - Option A: SASL_SSL (Server cert + User and pass)
> - Option B: mTLS (Server cert + Client cert signed by server)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Option A: SASL_SSL (Server cert + username+password)
- Option B: SSL (mTLS, Server cert + Client cert)
```

### Applicable for both authentication options

Define the following variables in advance:

```bash
# ---------- Environment
# Certs

> CERT_EXPIRATION_DAYS=7300 # 20 years expiration example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CERT_EXPIRATION_DAYS=365
```

# Some client applications require keystore in .p12 format
# client.keystore.jks -> client.keystore.p12
keytool -importkeystore \
  -srckeystore client.keystore.jks -srcstorepass $KAFKA_CLIENT_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD \
  -destkeystore client.keystore.p12 -deststoretype PKCS12 -deststorepass $KAFKA_CLIENT_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD \
  -srcalias client-key -destalias client-key
openssl pkcs12 -in client.keystore.p12 -nodes -nocerts -out client_private_key.pem --password pass:$KAFKA_CLIENT_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD

openssl genrsa -out client_key.pem 4096
openssl req -new -key client_key.pem -out client_csr.pem -subj "/C=US/ST=Denial/L=Springfield/O=Dis/CN=$KAFKA_CLIENT_MTLS_CN"
openssl x509 -req -CA ss_ca.pem -CAkey ss_ca.key -in client_csr.pem -out client_cert.pem -days $CERT_EXPIRATION_DAYS -CAcreateserial -passin pass:$SS_KEY_PASSWORD
cat ss_ca.pem client_cert.pem client_key.pem > client_chain.pem

openssl pkcs12 -export -in client_chain.pem \
 -out client.keystore.p12 -password pass:$KAFKA_CLIENT_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD \
 -name client-chain -noiter -nomaciter

> ```

Reviewer: Ah I see, you're giving two examples. 

Let's focus on just `.p12` and remove the `jks` Keystore from this example.

#### Trustsore (Server Cert)

We will inject Root CA and Server CA into the truststore file:

```bash
# ---------- Truststore
keytool -keystore client.truststore.jks -storepass $KAFKA_CLIENT_TRUSTSTORE_PASSWORD -noprompt \
  -importcert -alias kafka-ca -file kafka_ca.pem
keytool -keystore client.truststore.jks -storepass $KAFKA_CLIENT_TRUSTSTORE_PASSWORD -noprompt \
  -importcert -alias CARoot -file ss_ca.pem
```

#### Checking certs validity

```bash
# ---------- Teting Certs validity
echo "Client certs in Keystore:"

> keytool -list -keystore client.keystore.jks -storepass $KAFKA_CLIENT_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD -rfc | grep "Alias name"
> keytool -list -keystore client.keystore.jks -storepass $KAFKA_CLIENT_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD -v | grep until

Reviewer: ```suggestion
keytool -list -keystore client.keystore.p12 -storepass $KAFKA_CLIENT_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD -rfc | grep "Alias name"
keytool -list -keystore client.keystore.p12 -storepass $KAFKA_CLIENT_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD -v | grep until
```

Reviewer: See above comment.

echo "Server certs in Truststore:"
keytool -list -keystore client.truststore.jks -storepass $KAFKA_CLIENT_TRUSTSTORE_PASSWORD -rfc | grep "Alias name"
keytool -list -keystore client.truststore.jks -storepass $KAFKA_CLIENT_TRUSTSTORE_PASSWORD -v | grep until
```

### Option A: SASL_SSL

This includes SASL autentication through SSL, which requires:

> 1. For SSL the client needs to trust the server certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. For SSL, the client needs to trust the server certificates.
```

> 2. For SASL an username and password credential are required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. For SASL, username and password credentials are required.
```

> To create new users we are going to a SASL_SSL user admin credentials that are stored inside the Kafka server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create new users we are going to use `SASL_SSL` user admin credentials that are stored inside the Kafka server for administrators.
```

```bash
# ---------- Option A: SASL_SSL
# Create User
juju ssh kafka/leader "
echo 'LOG: Creating KAFKA_CLIENT_SASL_USER=$KAFKA_CLIENT_SASL_USER'

sudo charmed-kafka.configs \
  --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_SASL \
  --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.properties \
  --alter --entity-type=users \
  --entity-name=$KAFKA_CLIENT_SASL_USER \
  --add-config=SCRAM-SHA-512=[password=$KAFKA_CLIENT_SASL_PASSWORD]
"
```

```bash
# client-sasl.properties

> echo "sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.scram.ScramLoginModule required username=\"safefleet\" password=\"$KAFKA_CLIENT_SASL_PASSWORD\";" > client-sasl.properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
echo "sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.scram.ScramLoginModule required username=\"$KAFKA_CLIENT_SASL_USER\" password=\"$KAFKA_CLIENT_SASL_PASSWORD\";" > client-sasl.properties
```

echo sasl.mechanism=SCRAM-SHA-512 >> client-sasl.properties
echo security.protocol=SASL_SSL >> client-sasl.properties
echo bootstrap.servers=$KAFKA_SERVERS_MTLS >> client-sasl.properties
echo ssl.truststore.location=$SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.truststore.jks >> client-sasl.properties
echo ssl.truststore.password=$KAFKA_CLIENT_TRUSTSTORE_PASSWORD >> client-sasl.properties
echo ssl.truststore.type=JKS >> client-sasl.properties
echo ssl.keystore.location=$SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.keystore.p12 >> client-sasl.properties
echo ssl.keystore.password=$KAFKA_CLIENT_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD >> client-sasl.properties
echo ssl.keystore.type=PKCS12 >> client-sasl.properties
echo ssl.client.auth=none >> client-sasl.properties
```

### Option B: mTLS

This is a mutual TLS communication which means:

1. The client needs to trust the server certificates.

> 2. Instead of username and passwords, the client needs its own certificate signed by the server for the authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Instead of username and passwords, the client needs its own certificate signed by a certificate trusted by the server for the authentication.
```

```bash

> juju config kafka ssl_principal_mapping_rules=$KAFKA_SSL_PRINCIPAL_MAPPING_RULES

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# updating the charm config to use custom principal mapping rule
juju config kafka ssl_principal_mapping_rules=$KAFKA_SSL_PRINCIPAL_MAPPING_RULES
```

```

```bash
# ---------- Option B: mTLS
juju ssh kafka/leader "

sudo charmed-kafka.configs \
  --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_SASL \
  --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.properties \
  --alter --entity-type=users \
  --entity-name=$KAFKA_CLIENT_MTLS_CN \
"
```

```bash
# client-mtls.properties
echo security.protocol=SSL > client-mtls.properties
echo bootstrap.servers=$KAFKA_SERVERS_MTLS >> client-mtls.properties
echo ssl.truststore.location=$SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.truststore.jks >> client-mtls.properties
echo ssl.truststore.password=$KAFKA_CLIENT_TRUSTSTORE_PASSWORD >> client-mtls.properties
echo ssl.truststore.type=JKS >> client-mtls.properties
echo ssl.keystore.location=$SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.keystore.p12 >> client-mtls.properties
echo ssl.keystore.password=$KAFKA_CLIENT_KEYSTORE_PASSWORD >> client-mtls.properties
echo ssl.keystore.type=PKCS12 >> client-mtls.properties

> echo ssl.client.auth=none >> client-mtls.properties

Reviewer: **question:** Should this be `ssl.client.auth=required`?

```

## Authorization

### Manage Authorization through ACLs

In this **example** we will be granting read and write privileges `KAFKA_CLIENT_SASL_USER` over _group_, _topic_ and _transaction_ resources and read only permissions to `KAFKA_CLIENT_MTLS_CN`.

Notice you can create multiple SASL or multiple mTLS users and each can have their own set of privileges.

> You can also distribute one credential set to a group of multiple clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also distribute one set of ACL permissions to multiple principals.
```

sudo charmed-kafka.acls --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_SASL --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.properties \
  --add --allow-principal User:$KAFKA_CLIENT_SASL_USER \
  --operation DESCRIBE --operation WRITE --transactional-id '*'
"
```

```bash
juju ssh kafka/leader "
echo 'LOG: Creating ACLs for MTLS user'
sudo charmed-kafka.acls --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_SASL --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.properties \
  --add --allow-principal User:$KAFKA_CLIENT_MTLS_CN \
  --operation READ --operation DESCRIBE --group='*'

sudo charmed-kafka.acls --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_SASL --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.properties \
  --add --allow-principal User:$KAFKA_CLIENT_MTLS_CN \
  --operation READ --operation DESCRIBE --topic='*'

sudo charmed-kafka.acls --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_SASL --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.properties \
  --add --allow-principal User:$KAFKA_CLIENT_MTLS_CN \
  --operation DESCRIBE --transactional-id '*'
"
```

> Read more at https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/kafka/authorization.html#operations

## Testing access

> ```bash
> # ---------- Testing Kafka Access
> KAFKA_TEST_TOPIC=TEST-TOPIC-A
> 
> sudo cp client.truststore.jks $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/
> sudo cp client.keystore.p12 $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/
> sudo cp client-mtls.properties $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/
> sudo cp client-sasl.properties $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/
> 
> sudo chown snap_daemon:root $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-mtls.properties
> sudo chown snap_daemon:root $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-sasl.properties
> sudo chown snap_daemon:root $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.keystore.p12
> sudo chown snap_daemon:root $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.truststore.jks
> 
> # mTLS
> sudo charmed-kafka.topics --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_MTLS --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-mtls.properties \
>   --create --topic $KAFKA_TEST_TOPIC
> sudo charmed-kafka.topics --list --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_MTLS --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-mtls.properties
> 
> # SASL_SSL
> sudo charmed-kafka.topics --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_SASL --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-sasl.properties \
>   --create --topic $KAFKA_TEST_TOPIC
> sudo charmed-kafka.topics --list --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_SASL --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-sasl.properties
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
# ---------- Testing Kafka Access
KAFKA_TEST_TOPIC=EXAMPLE-TOPIC

# copying the files to a path readable by the `charmed-kafka` snap commands
sudo cp client.truststore.jks $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/
sudo cp client.keystore.p12 $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/
sudo cp client-mtls.properties $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/
sudo cp client-sasl.properties $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/

# confirming correct file permissions to be readable by the snap
sudo chown snap_daemon:root $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-mtls.properties
sudo chown snap_daemon:root $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-sasl.properties
sudo chown snap_daemon:root $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.keystore.p12
sudo chown snap_daemon:root $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client.truststore.jks

# mTLS
sudo charmed-kafka.topics --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_MTLS --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-mtls.properties \
  --create --topic $KAFKA_TEST_TOPIC
sudo charmed-kafka.topics --list --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_MTLS --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-mtls.properties

# SASL_SSL
sudo charmed-kafka.topics --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_SASL --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-sasl.properties \
  --create --topic $KAFKA_TEST_TOPIC
sudo charmed-kafka.topics --list --bootstrap-server $KAFKA_SERVERS_SASL --command-config $SNAP_KAFKA_PATH/client-sasl.properties
```
```
